Discuss the impact of the French Revolution on European societies and global politics..
Ans-
The French revolution brought fundamental social, political, and economic changes in the history of France..
End of the social divide: The French Revolution destroyed the social discriminative class system in France and declared equality for all..
This led to the rise of the middle class who had acquired education to positions of responsibility..
Declaration of rights of man: The constitutional assembly came out with the document of human rights which granted political liberty, like freedom of speech, press, association, worship, and ownership of property..
Revolutionary ideas: The revolution gave birth to the revolutionary ideas of liberty, equality, and fraternity..
These ideas started in France and spread to other areas like Italy, Germany, etc..
promoting equality, freedom and democracy, and good governance..
France became the birthplace of democracy..
End of Monarchy: The Bourbon monarch that had ruled France for over 400 years came to end by the French revolution..
The monarchy rule was abolished in 1792 and replaced it with the Republican form of Government..
Although the Bourbon monarch was restored by the great powers after the downfall of Napoleon, it could not survive beyond 1830 because the monarchs were already weakened by the changes caused by the French revolution..
Political Parties: France became a multiparty state as a result of the revolution..
The freedom of association led to the rise of political clubs such as the Jacobins, Cordeliers, etc that competed for power..
These parties kept the government under check and balance by criticizing bad policies..
Parliamentary Democracy: The French revolution led to the revival of the parliament which was abandoned for a period of over 175 years..
The revolution gave France a functional parliament with representatives who are democratically elected..
Constitution and Rule of Law: The French revolution introduced the rule of law..
Before 1789, France had no constitution to safeguard people’s rights and freedom..
The constitution clearly separated the executive, the judiciary, and the legislature..
Land ownership: The revolution brought new reforms and changes to land ownership in France..
Before the revolution, the land was dominated by the clergy and the nobles who exploited the peasants..
The working class was given equal rights to possess the land..
National Guard: There was the formation of the National Guard that replaced the royal guard of the Bourbon monarchy..
National Guard was the revolutionary army whose role was to protect the achievements of the French revolution.