Discuss the impact of the French Revolution on European societies and global politics..
Ans-
The French involvement in the American revolution of 1776 was a costly affair that left the country in a state of near bankruptcy..
King Louis’s extravagant spending also did not help matters..
Empty royal coffers, poor harvests and rise in food prices had created feelings of unrest among the poor rural and urban populace..
The matter was further worsened by the imposition of taxes that provided no relief..
As a result rioting, looting and general strikes became the norm
Towards the end of 1786, a universal land tax was proposed by the controller general, Charles Alexandre de Calonne..
This tax reform would no longer exempt the privileged classes like the clergy and the nobility as had been the case for centuries
The King summoned the Estates-General to pass these measures..
The Estates-General was an assembly that represented the French nobility clergy and the middle class..
The last time the Estates-General was called was in 1614..
The date of the meeting was fixed on May 5 1789, where grievances of the three estates would be presented to the king.To know the Difference Between Democracy and Monarchy visit the linked article..
Causes Of French Revolution of 1789-
Social – The social conditions in France in the late 18th century were extremely unequal and exploitative..
The clergy and the nobility formed the first two Estates and were the most privileged classes in French society..
They were exempt from payment of taxes to the State..
On the other hand, the Third Estate that consisted of peasants and workers formed the majority of the population..
They were burdened with excessive taxes with no political and social rights..
As a result, they were extremely discontent..
Economic – As a result of numerous wars waged by Louis XVI the State coffers were empty..
The situation was made even more complex by France’s involvement in the American War of Independence and the faulty system of taxation..
While the privileged classes were excused from paying taxes the Third Estate was more and more burdened with them..
Political – The Bourbon king of France, Louis XVI was an extremely autocratic and weak-willed king who led a life of obscene luxury..
This led to a lot of disenchantment among the masses who then were leading life of extreme poverty and widespread hunger..
Intellectual – The 18th century was marked by a conscious refusal by French thinkers of the ‘Divine Rights Theory’..
Philosophers like Rousseau rejected the paradigm of absolute monarchy and promulgated the doctrine of equality of man and sovereignty of people..
They played a pivotal role in exposing the fault lines of the old political system, i.e..
the ancien regime, and articulating the popular discontent.