Discuss the impact of the French Revolution on European societies and global politics..
Ans-
The era of the French Revolution and Napoleon ended in 1815 but it did not stop being important..
For many years to come, people all over Europe continued to feel its effects..
In all sorts of ways, it helped to shape their lives, their beliefs and the societies in which they lived..
Measure a metre, weigh a kilogram or pour out a litre, and you are using weights and measures invented by the revolutionaries in 1795..
Look at the flags of the countries of Europe, and you will see that half are modelled on the tricolour flag of the revolutionaries of 1789..
But the most significant legacy of 1789-1815 is to be found in the big ideas unleashed: liberalism, nationalism and revolution..
The French Revolution began, when the Estates General of 1789 declared that it was a 'National Assembly' and set to work to write a constitution..
It began by making a 'Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen’; giving French citizens equal rights and liberties..
The idea of giving people liberty and equality through a constitution was one of the important achievements of the revolution..
And when Napoleon conquered Europe in the 1800s, constitutions were introduced into the states that came under French control..
The ideas of liberty and equality therefore spread throughout Europe..
In 1815, however, after they had defeated Napoleon, the old rulers of Europe took back their thrones..
Many got rid of his constitutions and went back to ruling their states in the old way..
But they could not wipe out people's memories of what it was like to be ruled with a constitution..
Millions of Europeans became 'liberals', believing in the ideas of liberty and equality, and wanting a constitution giving them rights..
The revolutionaries of the nineteenth century borrowed images as well as ideas from the French Revolution..
The most famous of those images was that of 'Liberty'..
Liberty was portrayed as a young woman, Marianne, and she appeared in countless pictures, statues and models throughout the French Revolution..
She appeared again during the revolutions of 1830..
See Delacroix's image of the 1830 Revolution below..
(This is popular with Matu examiners and was in the oral in 2020)..
Perhaps the most famous image of Liberty is the Statue of Liberty at the entrance to New York harbour..
This 200 tonne, 97m high copper statue was a gift to the United States from the French people to show the friendship between their two republics..
It was suggested by a French historian to commemorate the 100th anniversary of American independence.