Discuss the impact of the French Revolution on European societies and global politics.
Ans-
The French Revolution recast German politics — whether by imitation, appropriation or rejection.
Events in 1790s France had an immediate effect, prompting popular disturbances and a wave of enthusiasm among German writers, both established and young.
Some went to Paris as “pilgrims of revolution.” But the ensuing terror led to disillusion.
“They have betrayed our ideals and dragged them in the mud,” lamented Caroline Schlegel.
Klopstock stopped writing odes to liberty.
The radical course of the French Revolution reinforced pride in German “moderation.”
War and occupation driven forward by Napoleon then led both to preemptive reforms and to a spasm of Francophobia among some German intellectuals in the early 19th century.
The French Revolution was transformative.
Most obviously, it redrew the map of central Europe and destroyed the Holy Roman Empire.
But it also turned Germany into a constitutional laboratory.
That process began in 1806, with the Napoleonic puppet states and the new constitutions granted in Baden and elsewhere.
It continued, however unevenly, through the eras of reform and reaction, and through the renewed political unrest of the years after 1815 in Greece, Italy, Belgium, Poland and Germany itself.
Most German rulers found themselves with new subjects after the Napoleonic years and the 1815 settlement.
They also had to operate on new political terrain.
They were forced to learn — some were slower learners than others — how to manufacture consent through state building, invented traditions and timely concessions.
By 1847, only four of the 39 member states of the German Confederation had no constitution.
Prussian Minister Karl August von Struensee told the French chargé d’affaires in 1799 that the revolution the French had made “from below” would be completed “gradually, from above” in Prussia.
Very gradually, it must be said, for Prussia was one of those four states that still lacked a constitution until after 1848.