Discuss the impact of the French Revolution on European societies and global politics.
Ans-
The French Revolution was a critical turning point in France's history and the modern history of Europe more broadly.
This monumental event or series of events began in 1789 and reached its peak during the 1790s with the emergence of Napoleon Bonaparte and his imperialistic and expansionary conquests in Europe and the Near East (Watson, 1992).
The revolution's remarkable status in European history is firstly attributable to the wide-ranging and unprecedented citizen-led efforts to deconstruct and redesign the political landscape of their country, in the process uprooting long-standing institutions and traditions like the feudal system and absolute monarchy (Watson, 1992).
Secondly, because such systems and institutions had come to define European culture and the European system of governance, over time, the reverberation of the revolution's consequences throughout Europe justifies the event’s characterization as a watershed moment in the history of the continent.
Before digging deeper into the implications of the Revolution for France, Europe, and beyond, a brief overview of the context and drivers surrounding the event’s unfolding is relevant at this juncture.
A preliminary examination of the factors responsible for the revolution reveals that the causes were largely economic (Halliday, 1999).
France was at the brink of economic collapse at the turn of the 18th
century owing to the extravagant spending of the monarch Louis XVI and his predecessor; and also because France’s involvement in the American Revolution had proven to be costly (Wendt, 1992).
This 
economic situation was further aggravated by ecological factors such as livestock disease and decades of poor harvest, which had cumulatively generated unrest among the urban poor, the peasantry, and the 
middle class (Watson, 1992).
The French government's fiscal policies were also partly to blame, given the high tax rate and provision of minimum relief to the masses in the duration leading to the revolution.