Explain the concept of social stratification and its impact on societies..
Ans-
Sociologists use the term social stratification to describe the system of social standing..
Social stratification refers to a society’s categorization of its people into rankings of socioeconomic tiers based on factors like wealth, income, race, education, and power..
You may remember the word “stratification” from geology class..
The distinct vertical layers found in rock, called stratification, are a good way to visualize social structure..
Society’s layers are made of people, and society’s resources are distributed unevenly throughout the layers..
The people who have more resources represent the top layer of the social structure of stratification..
Other groups of people, with progressively fewer and fewer resources, represent the lower layers of our society..
Strata in rock illustrate social stratification..
People are sorted, or layered, into social categories..
Many factors determine a person’s social standing, such as income, education, occupation, as well as age, race, gender, and even physical abilities..
However, sociologists recognize that social stratification is a society-wide system that makes inequalities apparent..
While there are always inequalities between individuals, sociologists are interested in larger social patterns..
Stratification is not about individual inequalities,
 but about systematic inequalities based on group membership, classes, and the like..
No individual, rich or poor, can be blamed for social inequalities..
The structure of society affects a person’s social standing..
Although individuals may support or fight inequalities, social stratification is created and supported by society as a whole..
The people who live in these houses most likely share similar levels of income and education..
Neighborhoods often house people of the same social standing..
Wealthy families do not typically live next door to poorer families, though this varies depending on the particular city and country.