Elaborate on the concept of natural selection and its role in the theory of evolution..
Provide examples of how natural selection can lead to the adaptation of species over time..
Ans-
In natural selection, genetic mutations that are beneficial to an individual's survival are passed on through reproduction..
This results in a new generation of organisms that are more likely to survive to reproduce..
For example, evolving long necks has enabled giraffes to feed on leaves that others can't reach, giving them a competitive advantage..
Thanks to a better food source, those with longer necks were able to survive to reproduce and so pass on the characteristic to the succeeding generation..
Those with shorter necks and access to less food would be less likely to survive to pass on their genes.Adrian explains, 'If you took 1,000 giraffes and measured their necks, 
they're all going to be slightly different from one another..
Those differences are at least in part determined by their genes..
'The ones with longer necks may leave proportionally more offspring, because they have fed better and have maybe been better in competing for mates because they are stronger..
Then, if you were to measure the necks of the next generation, they're also going to vary, but the average will have shifted slightly towards the longer ones..
The process carries on generation after generation.'.
An adaptation is a physical or behavioural characteristic that helps an organism to survive in its environment..
But not all characteristics of an animal are adaptations..
Adaptations for one purpose can be co-opted for another..
For instance, feathers were an adaptation for thermoregulation - their use for flight only came later..
This means that feathers are an exaptation for flight, rather than an adaptation..
Adaptations can also become outdated, such as the tough exterior of the calabash fruit (Crescentia cujete)..
This gourd is generally thought to have evolved to avoid being eaten by Gomphotheres, a family of elephant-like animals..
But these animals went extinct around 10,000 years ago, so the fruit's adaptation no longer has a survival benefit.