Explain the concept of continental drift and provide evidence supporting this theory.
Ans-
Today, most people know that the landmasses on Earth move around. But people haven’t always believed this. It wasn’t until the early 20th century that German scientist Alfred Wegener suggested that the Earth’s continents were drifting.
He called this movement Continental Drift. He was not the first or only person to think this, but he was the first to talk about the idea publicly.
Wegener came up with this idea because he noticed that the coasts of western Africa and eastern South America looked like puzzle pieces.
wondered if they might have once fit together and then drifted apart. Looking at the continents he theorized that they had once been joined together as a supercontinent around 225 million years ago.
 This continent was later named Pangaea.People now think that other supercontinents may also have existed. These supercontinents are thought to have come before Pangaea.
The idea of moving landmasses seems obvious now, but Wegener’s Theory of Continental Drift was not accepted for many years. 
Why? Well, for one thing, Wegener did not have a convincing explanation for the cause of the drifting. First, he suggested that the continents were moving around due to the Earth’s rotation.
This later turned out to be wrong. Secondly, he was a meteorologist, not a geologist. This meant that geologists didn’t think he knew what he was talking about and did not take him seriously.
Fossil Evidence:One type of evidence that strongly supported the Theory of Continental Drift is the fossil record. Scientists have found fossils of similar types of plants and animals in rocks of similar age. 
These rocks were on the shores of different continents. This suggests that the continents were once joined.
For example, fossils of Mesosaurus, a freshwater reptile, have been found both in Brazil and western Africa. Also, fossils of the land reptile Lystrosaurus have been found in Africa, India and Antarctica.